# Networks

This page describes the components that make up the input ABM3 networks, which include the highway (i.e., roadways), transit and active transportation networks.

To learn how ABM3 handles the networks, refer to the [Network Import from TNED](design/supply/network-import-tned.md) page. 

## Transportation Network Editing Database (TNED)

The ABM3 networks are edited, maintained, and generated via the Transportation Network Editing Database (TNED) system, which leverages ESRI's [ArcGIS Enterprise](https://enterprise.arcgis.com/en/get-started/latest/windows/what-is-arcgis-enterprise-.htm) and is hosted on an [enterprise geodatabase](https://enterprise.arcgis.com/en/server/latest/manage-data/windows/enterprise-geodatabases-and-arcgis-enterprise.htm). The TNED system, via an [ETL](https://pro.arcgis.com/en/pro-app/latest/help/data/data-interoperability/what-is-the-data-interoperability-extension.htm) (Extract, Load, Transform) process, outputs the input ABM3 networks in a variety of different formats including [file geodatabase](https://pro.arcgis.com/en/pro-app/latest/help/data/geodatabases/manage-file-gdb/file-geodatabases.htm), CSV, and [shapefiles](https://doc.arcgis.com/en/arcgis-online/reference/shapefiles.htm).

When describing the ABM3 networks, this page is specifically referring to the networks in their post-ETL state. A typical TNED ETL network directory includes the following:

*Note: Click on file name for additional details.*

<table>
    <tr>
        <td><strong>File Name</strong></td>
        <td><strong>File Format</strong></td>
        <td><strong>Description</strong></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><a href=#emme-outputs-file-geodatabase>EMMEOutputs.gdb</a></td>
        <td>File Geodatabase</td>
        <td>Houses a variety of feature classes and tables for the different ABM3 networks: highway, transit, and active transportation.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>info</td>
        <td>Directory</td>
        <td>A directory that houses TNED ETL logs, network QAQC reports, and configuration file utilized to generate the network. <br><br> Only for reference. Not used for modeling purposes.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>SANDAG_Bike_Net.shp</td>
        <td>Shapefile</td>
        <td>The links (arcs) of the active transportation network.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>SANDAG_Bike_Node.shp</td>
        <td>Shapefile</td>
        <td>The nodes of the active transportation network.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>special_fares.txt</td>
        <td>Text File</td>
        <td>Configures the zone-based fare scheme of the Coaster.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>timexfer_{TOD}.csv</td>
        <td>CSV</td>
        <td>Timed transfer table between the Coaster and feeder buses. There is a file for each of the 5 TODs (time-of-day), which are EA (early AM), AM, MD (midday), PM, and EV (evening).</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>trrt.csv</td>
        <td>CSV</td>
        <td>List of all transit routes in network and information on their mode, frequencies, hours of service, and fares.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>trlink.csv</td>
        <td>CSV</td>
        <td>Ordered sequential list of underlying network links (arcs) for each transit route in the network.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>trstop.csv</td>
        <td>CSV</td>
        <td>List of stops for each transit route in the network.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>turns.csv</td>
        <td>CSV</td>
        <td>Turn prohibitor table listing vehicle turn movements that are not allowed.</td>
    </tr>
</table>

### EMME Outputs File Geodatabase

The ***EMMEOutputs.gdb*** is a file geodatabase that gets generated by the TNED ETL process. It houses link and node feature classes along with tables. The contents of the EMMEOutputs.gdb is as follows:

*Note: Click on file names for additional details.*

<table>
    <tr>
        <td><strong>File Name</strong></td>
        <td><strong>File Format</strong></td>
        <td><strong>Description</strong></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Bike_Net_{year}_{alternative}</td>
        <td>File Geodatabase Feature Class</td>
        <td>The links (arcs) of the active transportation network for a given year and alternative (i.e., build, no build). <br><br> The shapefile version of this feature class (outside the geodatabase) is the version that gets used as an input.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Bike_Node_{year}_{alternative}</td>
        <td>File Geodatabase Feature Class</td>
        <td>The nodes of the active transportation network for a given year and alternative (i.e., build, no build). <br><br> The shapefile version of this feature class (outside the geodatabase) is the version that gets used as an input.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td><a href=#tned-transit-route-segment-mismatch-table>ERROR_RouteSegmentMissingInHwyNetOrRailNet</a></td>
        <td>File Geodatabase Table</td>
        <td>A list of roadway or rail segments flagged as being part of a transit route even though the specific segment may not be part of the roadway or rail network. Note that these records have already been checked and have been noted to be warnings rather than fatal errors.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>TNED_HwyNet</td>
        <td>File Geodatabase Feature Class</td>
        <td>Road segment line feature class.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>TNED_HwyNodes</td>
        <td>File Geodatabase Feature Class</td>
        <td>Road segment node feature class.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>TNED_RailNet</td>
        <td>File Geodatabase Feature Class</td>
        <td>Rail (Transit) segment line feature class.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>TNED_RailNodes</td>
        <td>File Geodatabase Feature Class</td>
        <td>Rail (Transit) segment node feature class.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>TransitRoute</td>
        <td>File Geodatabase Feature Class</td>
        <td>Transit route feature class.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>trrt</td>
        <td>File Geodatabase Table</td>
        <td>List of all transit routes in network and information on their mode, frequencies, hours of service, and fares. <br><br> The CSV version of this feature class (outside the geodatabase) is the version that gets used as an input.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>trlink</td>
        <td>File Geodatabase Table</td>
        <td>Ordered sequential list of underlying network links (arcs) for each transit route in the network. <br><br> The CSV version of this feature class (outside the geodatabase) is the version that gets used as an input.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>trstop</td>
        <td>File Geodatabase Table</td>
        <td>List of stops for each transit route in the network. <br><br> The CSV version of this feature class (outside the geodatabase) is the version that gets used as an input.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Turns</td>
        <td>File Geodatabase Table</td>
        <td>Turn prohibitor table listing vehicle turn movements that are not allowed. <br><br> The CSV version of this feature class (outside the geodatabase) is the version that gets used as an input.</td>
    </tr>
</table>

### TNED Transit Route Segment Mismatch Table

The ***ERROR_RouteSegmentMissingInHwyNetOrRailNet*** lists mismatches between the TransitRoute feature class and both the TNED_RailNet and TNED_HwyNet feature classes. If a transit route is coded along a rail or roadway segment that is not explicitly included in the network, it will flag the record. It should be noted that some records serve more as warnings rather than fatal errors. There are certain nuances, for example, for a proposed roadway that may have an uncertain horizon year and if a future transit route utilizes the roadway, the TNED ETL process will bring in the roadway as a bus-only street (no private vehicles allowed) as a fallback. This may be common in areas of the San Diego region where proposed development is far off in the future.

<table>
    <tr>
        <td><strong>Attribute</strong></td>
        <td><strong>Description</strong></td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>OBJECTID</td>
        <td>An ObjectID is a unique, not null integer field used to uniquely identify rows in tables in a geodatabase.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>TNEDSegmentGlobalID</td>
        <td>A unique TNED-generated globally unique identifier for records from the TNEDSegment feature class.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>TCOVED_ID</td>
        <td>SANDAG-assigned link ID</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>SegmentInfoGlobalID</td>
        <td>A unique TNED-generated globally unique identifier for records from the SegmentInfo table.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Year</td>
        <td>Initial year of segment.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>ProjectID</td>
        <td>Associated project code. If no project code is associated with segment, a value of 0 will be listed.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>RouteID_from_TransitRoute</td>
        <td>The RouteID of the transit route using segment. The RouteID is the concatenated Route, direction and configuration of the transit route. This unique ID is best read from right to left as the last 2 digits refer to the Configuration, the 3rd digit from the right refers to the Direction (1 or 2), and the remaining leftmost digits refer to the Route. For example, 398212 is configuration 12 in the outbound (2 direction) of route 398.</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
        <td>Route_ID_from_trrt</td>
        <td>Sequential unique transit route identifier. This is not the same as the route number. To determine which Route_ID corresponds to which transit route, refer to the trrt.csv file.</td>
    </tr>
</table>